---
title: affine connection
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: In progress
aliases:
  - covariant derivative
---
Affine connections are ways of taking "derivatives" of vector fields with other ones. 
It is a different notion than the Lie derivative, though. 

# Definition
Let $M$ be a [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]] with [[202404011135|vector fields]] $\mathfrak{X}(M)$. 
An **affine connection** is a map
$$
\begin{align*}
\nabla:\mathfrak{X}(M) \times \mathfrak{X}(M) &\longrightarrow \mathfrak{X}(M)\\
(X,Y) &\longmapsto \nabla_XY
\end{align*}
$$
that satisfies the following properties:

1. Tensorial in $X$. 
$$
\nabla_{fX + g\tilde X} Y=  f\nabla_XY + g\nabla_{\tilde X}Y \qquad f,g \in C^\infty(M)
$$

2. $\mathbb{R}$- linear in $Y$
$$
\nabla_X(Y+\tilde Y) = \nabla_XY + \nabla_{X}\tilde Y
$$

3. Derivation in $Y$
$$
\nabla_X(fY) = (X\cdot f)Y + f\nabla_XY \qquad f \in C^\infty(M)
$$


> [!NOTE] Nonexample
> The Lie bracket is NOT tensorial in X or Y.

# Relationship with covariant derivative
Many authors consider **covariant derivative** to be just an alternate name for an affine connection. 

In [[@docarmo1992Riemannian]] there is a distinction made. 

Let $M$ be a manifold with an affine connection $\nabla$. 
Let $c:I \to M$ be a [[202405081514|curve]] on the manifold $M$ and consider vector fields along that curve and denote these by $\mathfrak{X}(c)$. 
There is a unique mapping called the **covariant derivative**
$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{D}{dt}:\mathfrak{X}(c) &\longrightarrow \mathfrak{X}(c)\\
V &\longmapsto \frac{DV}{dt}
\end{align*}
$$
that has the following properties:

1. Linear in $V$: $\frac{D}{dt}(V + W) = \frac{DV}{dt} + \frac{DW}{dt}$ 

2. Liebniz rule: $\frac{D}{dt}(fV) = \frac{df}{dt}V + f\frac{DV}{dt}$ for $f \in C^\infty(M)$ 

3. If $V$ is induced by a vector field $Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$ (that is, $V(t) = Y(c(t))$ ) then $\frac{DV}{dt} = \nabla_{dc/dt}Y$. 

This means a couple of things. 
First, an affine connection at a point really only depends on values of the vector field on a curve running through that point. 
Next, there is an intrinsic idea of differentiation for a vector field that has familiar looking properties that is equivalent to an affine connection. 
Thus, we should think of an affine connection as the "derivative" of a vector field along curves. 

The proof is in [[@docarmo1992Riemannian]] page 51.
# Local Property
Affine connections are local. 
That means that if for vector fields $X,Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$ and either $X$ or $Y$ vanish identically on an open set $U \subset M$ then $\nabla_XY$ vanishes on $U$. 

## Proof
#todo 

## Corollary
If $X,Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$ coincide with $\tilde X, \tilde Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$ on some open set $W \subset M$ then $\nabla_XY = \nabla_{\tilde X}\tilde Y$. 

# In coordinates
An affine connection can be written in coordinates using the [[202410111339|Christoffel symbols]]. 
Consider vector fields 

$$
X = X^i\frac{\partial}{\partial x^i} \quad \text{and} \quad Y=Y^i \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i}
$$

on $W$ we have 
$$
\nabla_XY = \sum_{i=1}^n\left( X\cdot Y^i  + \sum_{j,k = 1}^n \Gamma^i_{jk} X^jY^k\right) \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i}
$$

