---
title: skeleton
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
Given a [[202409161019|category]] $\mathcal{C}$, a skeleton is a subcategory that is equivalent to $\mathcal{C}$ but has no "redundant" objects. 
You can think of a skeleton as the most "economical" model for the category $\mathcal{C}$. 

# Definition
A **skeleton** of a category $\mathcal{C}$ is a subcategory $\mathcal{S}$ for which each object in $\mathcal{C}$ is isomorphic to exactly one object in $\mathcal{S}$ and the canonical inclusion [[202409162145|functor]] 
$$
i:\mathcal{S} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}
$$
is [[202409171519|fully]] [[202409171523|faithful]]. 

Note, by [[202409162212#^3f61ac|this lemma]] $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{C}$ are equivalent. 

# Existence of skeleton
Every category has a skeleton. 
This is because we can define equivalence classes on $\text{ob}(\mathcal{C})$ using isomorphism of objects (which defines an equivalence relation by [[202409162208#Properties of isomorphisms|this]]).

Then for each equivalence class choose a representative (using the Axiom of Choice and a few other intense details). 

Using these representatives, take all the morphism from $\mathcal{C}$ between those objects to ensure that $i:\mathcal{S} \to \mathcal{C}$ is fully faithful looking at morphisms between objects in $\mathcal{S}$. 

# Examples
- $\text{Set}_0^{\text{fin}}$ (the finite sets of natural numbers $\{1, \dots, n\}$ is a skeleton of $\text{Set}^{\text{fin}}$ (finite sets). 

- $\text{vect}_{k,0}^{\text{fin}}$ is a skeleton of $\text{vect}^{\text{fin}}_k$ 

# Equivalence using skeletons
Let $\mathcal{C}_1, \mathcal{C}_2$ be categories with skeletons $\mathcal{S}_1, \mathcal{S}_2$. 
Then $\mathcal{C}_1$ and $\mathcal{C}_2$ are equivalent if and only if $\mathcal{S}_1$ and $\mathcal{S}_2$ are isomorphic (i.e. equivalent with only identity natural isomorphisms). 

## Remark
This means that if you are only using skeletal categories (those that no two items are isomorphic to each other) then you can use a more naive notion of equivalence without quasi-inverses. 
However, most (interesting) categories aren't skeletal. 
## Proof (sketch)
Let $F:\mathcal{C}_1 \to \mathcal{C}_2$ be an equivalence of categories. 
We aim to build an isomorphism (call it $\tilde F$) between $\mathcal{S}_1$ and $\mathcal{S}_2$. 

For each object $z \in \mathcal{C}_2$ pick an isomorphism $g_z:z \to s \in \mathcal{S}_2$. 
The object $s \in S_2$ is unique since $\mathcal{S}_2$ is a skeleton. 
Now for $x \in \mathcal{S}_1$, let $\tilde F(x)$ be the unique object in $\mathcal{S}_2$ that is isomorphic to $F(x)$. 
Next, we need to define what the (proposed) functor does to morphisms. 
We do this using the maps we know we have coming from the equivalence $F$ and the isomorphism 
Given a morphism $x \xrightarrow{f} y$ in $\mathcal{S}_1$, define $\tilde F(f):\tilde F(x) \to \tilde F(y)$ to be the composition 
$$
\tilde F(x) \xrightarrow{g_{F(x)}^{-1}} F(x) \xrightarrow{F(f)} F(y) \xrightarrow{g_{F(y)}} \tilde F(y)
$$

Since we built everything using a functor and isomorphisms $\tilde F$ is a functor. 

We can now build an inverse functor $\tilde G:\mathcal{S}_2 \to \mathcal{S}_1$ that is strict (has no need for a quasi-inverse the objects will be identical, not simply isomorphic). 
Given $z \in \mathcal{S}_2$, let $\tilde G(z) \in \mathcal{S}_1$ be the unique object of $\mathcal{S}_1$ such that 
$$
\tilde F(\tilde G(z)) \simeq z.
$$
The fact that this exists uses that $F$ is [[202409171525|essentially surjective]]. 

Given a morphism $h:z \to w$ in $\mathcal{S}_2$, define $\tilde G(h): \tilde G(z) \to \tilde G(w)$ so that 
$$
\tilde F(\tilde G(h)) = h.
$$
This uses that $F$ is fully faithful. 

Therefore, 
$$
\tilde F \circ \tilde G = \text{id}_{\mathcal{S}_2} \quad \text{and} \quad \tilde G \circ \tilde F = \text{id}_{\mathcal{S}_1}
$$

For the other direction, assume that $\mathcal{S}_1$ and $\mathcal{S}_2$ are isomorphic. 
We can define an equivalence 
$$
\mathcal{C}_1 \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}_2
$$
using the composition 
$$
\mathcal{C}_1 \xrightarrow{f} \mathcal{S}_1 \xrightarrow{g} 
\mathcal{S}_2 \xrightarrow{h} \mathcal{C}_2
$$
where 
- $f$ is any quasi-inverse of the inclusion $\mathcal{S}_1  \to \mathcal{C}_1$, 

- $g$ is the assumed isomorphism between skeletons

- $h$ is the canonical inclusion (which we know is an equivalence). 
