---
title: vector space as a k-module
draft: false
tags:
status: Cleanup
---
# Motivation
Let $k$ be a [[202404171508|field]]. 
A $k$-[[202409182227|module]] is a [[202411200925|vector space]] over $k$. 
This can be formalized using [[202409161019|categories]], which gives us a way to study vector spaces using module theory or to understand certain modules given linear algebra. 

# Equivalence of categories of vector spaces
The categories $k-\text{mod}^{\text{f.g.}}$ and $\text{vect}_k^{\text{f.d.}}$ are [[202409162212|equivalent]]. 
## Proof
We define a functor 
$$
F:k-\text{mod}^{\text{f.g.}} \longrightarrow \text{vect}_k^{\text{f.d.}}.
$$
Given a $k$-module $M$, we choose that $M$ is the data of a vector space over $k$. 
Therefore, $F(M)= M$ under reinterpretation (noting that $M$) satisfies all of the axioms for a vector space. 

Let $f: M \to N$ be a $k$-module morphism. 
Thus, $f$ is an abelian group which satisfies
$$
f(K \cdot m) = K \cdot f(m) \qquad \forall K \in k, m \in M
$$
Therefore, $f$ is $k$-linear so it is a morphism of $k$-vector spaces, and we may set $F(f) = f$. 

Somewhat trivially, $F$ is fully faithful and essentially surjective. 

## Interpretation
With the above equivalence, we can interpret $k$-module morphisms as matrices with entries in $k$. 
These matrices will differ with choices of bases, but different bases will lead to similar matrices. 
We can say this more formally using the language from above. 

Choosing a basis is the same as choosing a $k$-linear map 
$$
\alpha: k^{\oplus d} \longrightarrow M \qquad d=\dim_kM.
$$
(We know this morphism exists and is an isomorphism since $k$-modules don't have any [[202410091156|torsion (module theory)]], and are thus free.)
Under this morphism, the ordered basis of $M$ is $\{\alpha(e_1), \dots, \alpha(e_d)\}$. 

Given an ordered basis $\beta:k^{\oplus e}\to N$ for a $k$-module $N$, we have the following commutative diagram. 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
k^{\oplus d} \arrow[r, "f_{\alpha,\beta}"] \arrow[d, "\alpha"] & k^{\oplus e} \arrow[d, "\beta"] \\
M \arrow[r, "f"] & N

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```
where $f_{\alpha, \beta} \in \text{Mat}_{d \times e}(k)$. 

If $\alpha^\prime$ and $\beta^\prime$ are a second choice of ordered basis, then we can extend the diagram to 

```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
k^{\oplus d} \arrow[r, "f_{\alpha,\beta}"] \arrow[d, "\alpha",swap] & k^{\oplus e} \arrow[d, "\beta"] \\
M \arrow[r, "f"] & N\\
k^{\oplus d} \arrow[r, "f_{\alpha^\prime,\beta^\prime}"] \arrow[u, "\alpha^\prime"] & k^{\oplus e} \arrow[u, "\beta^\prime",swap] \\
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```
Note that $\alpha^{-1} \circ \alpha^\prime$ and $\beta^{-1}\circ \beta^\prime$ are both invertible matrices, we can call them 
$$
A \in \text{GL}_d(k) \quad \text{and} \quad B \in \text{GL}_e(k).
$$
Therefore, by commutative of the diagram above, we get 
$$
f_{\alpha,\beta}= Bf_{\alpha^\prime,\beta^\prime}A^{-1}.
$$

# Equivalence of categories with endomorphisms
## Definition
Let $\mathcal{C}$ be [[202409161019|category]] with
- Objects: pairs $(V, \phi)$ where $V$ is a finite dimensional vector space over $k$ and $\phi:V \to V$ is a $k$-linear map. 
- Morphisms: $f:(V, \phi) \to (W, \psi)$ are $k$-linear maps $f:V \to W$ such that the following diagram commute
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
V \arrow[d, "\phi"] \arrow[r, "f"] &W \arrow[d, "\psi"]\\
V \arrow[r, "f"] & W

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

Morphisms are composed by composing $k$-linear maps.

## Lemma
The categories $\mathcal{C}$ and $k[x]-\text{mod}^{\text{f.g.tor}}$ are equivalent. 

## Proof
We define a restriction functor using any ring homomorphism $h:R \to S$. 
Given an $S$-module $M$, 
$$
S \to \text{End}_{\text{Ab}}(M)
$$
we define $h^*M$ to the composition 
$$
R \xrightarrow{ \ h \ } S \rightarrow \text{End}_{\text{Ab}}(M).
$$
Given a morphism $\phi:M \to N$ of $S$-modules define 
$$
\begin{align*}
h^*\phi:h^*M &\longrightarrow N \\
m &\longmapsto \phi(m)
\end{align*}
$$
We can check this is $R$-linear:
$$
\begin{align*}
(h^*\phi)(r\cdot m) &= (h^*\phi)(h(r)\cdot m)\\
&= \phi(h(r)\cdot m) \\
&= h(r) \phi(m) \\
&= r\cdot (h^*\phi)(m)
\end{align*}
$$

We can use this and apply it to the inclusion $h:k\hookrightarrow k[x]$ gives
$$
h:k[x]\text{-mod} \longrightarrow k\text{-mod}.
$$

Therefore, we define a functor $F(M) = (h^*M, X:M \xrightarrow{x}M)$ where $X$ is the action of $x\in k[x]$ on the vector space $h^*M$. 
On morphisms
$$
F(f:M\to N) = h^*f
$$
$F$ is fully faithful and surjective. 

## Interpretation
Consider the subcategory $\mathcal{C}_0$ of objects of the form $k^{\oplus n}$ for $n\geq 0$. 
This is a [[202409182055|skeleton]] of $\mathcal C$, so we may interpret the $k$-linear map $\phi, \psi$ as matrices in $\mathcal C$. 
Therefore, to classify the morphisms of finite generated torsion $k[x]$ modules is the same as classifying isomorphism classes of objects in $\mathcal C_0$. 
This is the same as classifying square matrices up to conjugation.

