---
title: tensor product
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Cleanup
---
# Motivation
Tensor products are a way to systematically study bilinear maps of [[202409182227|modules]].
They end up having a lot of uses that come from the fact that multilinear functions appear in a lot of places. 
Tensor products were first introduced to study the following question:
Does there exist an $R$-module $T$ such that 
$$
\left\{\begin{matrix}R\text{-bilinear maps}\\ M \times N \to P\end{matrix}\right\} \longleftrightarrow \text{Hom}_R(T,P)
$$
Thus, tensor products are a way to use what we know of homomorphisms of modules (which are $R$ _linear_ maps) to study _multi_-linear maps. 
# Universal Property
A **tensor product of $M$ and $N$** is an $R$-module $T$ together with an $R$-bilinear map $M \times N \to T$ which satisfies the following universal property:

For any $R$-bilinear map $f:M \times N \to P$, there exists a unique $R$-linear map $\tilde f:T \to P$ which makes the following diagram commute:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
M \arrow[dr, "f", swap] \times N \arrow[r] & T\arrow[d, "\tilde f"] \\
& P

\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

## Uniqueness
If it exists, $T$ is unique up to unique isomorphism.

### Proof
Say $T, \tilde T$ are two tensor products. 
By the universal property of $T$, there exists a unique $R$-module homomorphism $T \to \tilde T$ such that the following diagram commutes:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
M \times N \arrow[r] \arrow[dr] &T \arrow[d] \\
& \tilde T

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```
Also, 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
M \times N \arrow[r] \arrow[dr] &\tilde T \arrow[d] \\
& T

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

uniquely. 
Applying again, the universal property shows that $T \to \tilde T$ and $\tilde T \to T$ are mutually inverse. 

Therefore, we denote the unique tensor product $T$ as $M \otimes_R N$. 
# Existence (formal construction)
We can construct an explicit module and bilinear map the satisfies the universal property above. 

Let $F$ be the [[202409302304|free R-module]] on the set $M \times N$. 
Thus, an arbitrary element of $F$ takes the form 
$$
\sum_{\begin{matrix}(m,n) \in M \times N\\\text{finite}\end{matrix}} c_{m,n}(m,n)
$$

Let $G \subset F$ be the $R$-submodule generated by the following elements:
1. $(m_1 + m_2, n) - (m_1, n) - (m_2,n)$

2. $(m, n_1 + n_2) - (m, n_1) - (m,n_2)$

3. $(rm, n) - r(m,n)$    $r \in R$. 

4. $(m, rn) - r(m,n)$

The canonical map
$$
\begin{align*}
i:M \times N &\longrightarrow F/G \\
(m,n) &\longmapsto [(m,n)]
\end{align*}
$$
is a tensor product
## Proof
First, $i$ is bilinear:
$$
i(m,n_1 + n_2) = [(m,n_1 + n_2)] = [(m,n_1)] + [(m,n_2)]
$$
by property 2 of $G$.
Also, 
$$
i(m,rn) = [(m,rn)] = r[(m,n)]
$$
by property 4. 
The same idea follows using properties 1 and 3 in the first position.

Now, we just need to show it satisfies the universal property.
Let $f:M \times N \to P$ be $R$-bilinear. 
Define an $R$-linear map
$$
\begin{align*}
\tilde f:F &\longrightarrow P \\
(m,n) &\longmapsto f(m,n)
\end{align*}
$$
This determines $\tilde f$ uniquely based on the universal property of free modules. 
Note that 
$$
\begin{align*}
&\tilde f(m_1 + m_2, n) - \tilde f(m_1, n) - \tilde f(m_2,n) \\&\qquad=
f(m_1 + m_2, n) - f(m_1, n) - f(m_2,n) \\
&\qquad= 0
\end{align*}
$$
and
$$
\tilde f(rm, n) - \tilde f(r(m,n)) =
f(rm, n) - rf(m,n) =0
$$
by bilinearity of $f$. 
This proves that $G$ is in the kernel of $\tilde f$. 
By the universal property of [[202410021257#Universal property|quotients]], there exists a unique $R$-linear map $F/G \to P$ such that the following diagram commutes
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
&M \times N \arrow[dl, swap, "i"] \arrow[dr, "f"] &\\
F \arrow[rr, "\tilde f"] \arrow[d] & & P \\
F/G \arrow[urr, dashrightarrow, "\tilde f",swap] &&
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```
By the universal properties, $\tilde f$ is unique. 

## Notation
We write $m \otimes n$ for the class of $(m,n)$ in $F/G$. 
Thus, the canonical map
$$
\begin{align*}
M \times N &\longrightarrow M \otimes_R N\\
(m,n) &\longmapsto m \otimes n.
\end{align*}
$$
The relations 1-4 in $G$ which descend to $M \otimes_R N$ then read
1. $(m_1 + m_2) \otimes n = m_1\otimes n + m_2 \otimes n$

2. $m \otimes (n_1 + n_2) =m \otimes n_1 + m \otimes n_2$ 

3. $rm \otimes n = r(m\otimes n) = m \otimes rn$
# Properties
1. $M \otimes_R R \simeq M$ 

2. $M \otimes_R N \simeq N \otimes_R M$ 

3. $(M_1 \oplus M_2) \otimes_R N \simeq M_1 \otimes_R N \oplus M_2 \otimes_R N$ 

4. $R^{\oplus m} \otimes_R R^{\oplus n} \simeq R^{\oplus mn}$ 
# Tensor products as functors
Let $f:M \to M^\prime$ be a morphism of $R$-modules. 
This induces a morphism of $R$-modules $M \otimes_R N \to M^\prime \otimes_R N$ as follows
$$
M \times N \xrightarrow{f \times \text{id}} M^\prime \times N \longrightarrow M^\prime \otimes_R N
$$
is bilinear. 
Hence, by the universal property of the tensor product, there exists a unique $R$-linear map 
$M \otimes_R N \to M^\prime \otimes_R N$ such that the following diagram commutes:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
M \times N \arrow[r] \arrow[dr] &M \otimes_R N \arrow[d, dashrightarrow]\\
& M^\prime \otimes_R N

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

Thus, by the universal property, $\text{id}_M:M \to M$ induces the identity map 
$$
\text{id}_{M\otimes_R N}:M \otimes_R N \longrightarrow M \otimes_R N
$$

Therefore, for each $R$-module $N$, we get a [[202409162145|functor]] 
$$
- \otimes_R N:R\text{-mod} \to R\text{-mod}.
$$

We can also define a second functor
$$
\text{Hom}_R(N,-):R\text{-mod} \longrightarrow R\text{-mod}.
$$
where 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
R\text{-mod} \arrow[r] & R\text{-mod} \\
P \arrow[r, mapsto] \arrow[d, "f"] &\text{Hom}_R(N,P) \arrow[d, "f \circ (-)"]\\
P^\prime \arrow[r, mapsto] & \text{Hom}_R(N, P^\prime)

\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

## Tensor-Hom adjunction
For $R$-modules $M,N,P$, there is a canonical $R$-module isomorphism
$$
\text{Hom}_R(M \otimes_R N, P) \simeq \text{Hom}_R(M, \text{Hom}_R(N,P))
$$
### Proof
Let $f \in \text{Hom}_R(M \otimes_R N ,P)$, interpreted as an $R$-bilinear map
$$
f:M \times N \longrightarrow P.
$$
Then $f(m,-) \in \text{Hom}_R(N, P)$. 
This defines a map 
$$
\begin{align*}
\phi:\text{Hom}_R(M \otimes_R N, P) &\longrightarrow \text{Hom}_R(M, \text{Hom}_R(N,P)) \\
f &\longmapsto \big(m \mapsto f(m,-)\big)
\end{align*}
$$
This is $R$-linear. 

Similarly, given $g \in \text{Hom}_R(M, \text{Hom}_R(N,P))$, define an $R$-linear map
$$
\begin{align*}
M \times N &\longrightarrow P \\
(m,n) &\longmapsto g(m)n
\end{align*}
$$
This defines a map
$$
\text{Hom}_R\big(M, \text{Hom}_R(N,P)\big)\longrightarrow \text{Hom}_R(M \otimes_R N, P)
$$
which is inverse to $\phi$. 