---
title: local ring
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: In progress
aliases:
  - residue field
---
# Definition
A **local ring** is a commutative ring $R$ with a unique maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m} \subset R$.

The field $R / \mathfrak{m}$ is called the **residue field** of $R$.

# Examples
## Any field
In a field, every non-zero element is a unit. 
An ideal that is a proper subset cannot contain a unit, so the maximal ideal is the trivial ideal $\{0\}$. 
Therefore, the residue field is $k / \{0\} = k$. 

## Formal power series
Let $k$ be a field. 
The ring of formal power series with coefficients in $k$ (denoted $k[\![x]\!]$) is the ring with elements that are infinite formal sums
$$
\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a_n x^n,
\qquad
a_i \in k
$$
and are added an multiplied in the familiar way. (Since these sums are formal, without concern for convergence, there is no danger in multiplying them.)

*Claim:* $k [\![x]\!]$ is a local ring.

Let $\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a_n x^n$ be a unit. 
Then 
$$
\left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a_n x^n\right)\left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} b_n x^n\right) = \sum_{n=0}^\infty \left(\sum_{j=1}^n a_jb_{n-j}\right)x^n = 1
$$
Hence, $a_0b_0 = 1$ so since $k$ is a field, $a_0 \neq 0$. 

Next, let $a_0 \neq 0$. 
We want to build a multiplicative inverse to the infinite formal sum.
To fix the constant term, let $b_0 = a_0^{-1}$. 
Then for $n \geq 1$, let 
$$
b_n = a_0^{-1}\left(-\sum_{j=1}^n a_jb_{n-j} \right)
$$
This is chosen such that 
$$
\begin{align*}
b_n &= a_0^{-1}\left(-\sum_{j=1}^n a_jb_{n-j} \right) \\
a_0b_n &= \left(-\sum_{j=1}^n a_jb_{n-j} \right) \\
0&= a_0b_n + \sum_{j=1}^n a_jb_{n-j} 
\end{align*}
$$
Therefore, 
$$
\left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a_n x^n\right)\left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} b_n x^n\right) = a_0a_0^{-1} + \sum_{n=1}^\infty 0 x^n = 1
$$
Thus, $\sum^\infty a_nx^n$ is a unit. 
That means that the only elements that could be in a maximal ideal are those without constant terms, that is 
$$
\mathfrak{m} = \left\{\sum_{n=1}^\infty a_nx^n \ \bigg| \ a_n \in R\right\}
$$
Note this is an ideal generated by $x$, and it is maximal since if there were any other element it would have a non-zero constant term which would force the ideal to be the entire ring. 
Any other proper ideal is contained in $\mathfrak{m}$. 