---
title: Jacobson radical
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Cleanup
---
# Definition
The **Jacobson radical** of a commutative [[202404171457|ring]] $R$ is the intersection of all [[202409172306#Important types of ideals|maximal ideals]] of $R$.

# Qualification of elements
An element $r \in R$ is in the Jacobson radical $J$ if and only if $1+rs$ is a unit for all $s \in R$.

## Proof
Let $r \in J$.
It is important to note that a maximal ideal cannot contain a unit, or it would not be a proper subset of $R$. 
Additionally, every element that is not a unit is in some maximal ideal, as one can always take the ideal generated by the element (which is a proper subset of $R$ since it is not a unit). 
If this ideal is not maximal, take the maximal ideal that it is contained in. 

Assume for a contradiction that $1 + rs$ is not a unit. 
Then $1 + rs \in I$  for some maximal ideal $I \subset R$. 
We know that $r \in I$ by definition since $r \in J$. 
Therefore, $-rs \in I$ for every $s \in R$ and 
$$
(1 + rs) - rs = 1 \in I
$$
this is a contradiction as $I$ is a maximal ideal. 
Hence, $1 + rs$ is a unit. 

Next, let $1 + rs$ be a unit for every $s \in R$. 
Just for sanity's sake, I will show that $r$ cannot be a unit. 
If $r$ were a unit, then we could set $s = r^{-1}(-1)$. 
Since $1 + rs$ is a unit then multiplying by its inverse $x$ would give
$$
\begin{align*}
  (1 + r(-r^{-1}))x = 1 \\
  x + -r(r^{-1})x = 1 \\
  x - x = 1\\
  0 = 1.
\end{align*}
$$

So $r$ is contained in some maximal ideal, but it remains to show that it is contained in all of them. 
Assume otherwise for contradiction, and let $m$ be a maximal ideal such that $r \notin m$. 
Then we can take the ideal adding $r$ as a generator, $m + (r)$. 
This means that $m \subset m + (r)$, but $m$ is maximal therefore, 
$$
m + (r) = R
$$
Thus, we can pick some element $\tilde m \in m$ and $rn \in (r)$ such that 
$$
1 = \tilde m + rn \implies \tilde m = 1 + r(-n).
$$
However, $\tilde m \in m$ and $1 + r(-n)$ is a unit by the hypothesis which is a contradiction. 
Hence, $r \in m$ for every maximal ideal $m$ and thus $r \in J$. 

# Non-commutative case... eventually...

