---
title: maximal spectrum
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Cleanup
---
# Definition
Let $X$ be a [[202405201029|compact]], [[20240104115847-hausdorff_space|Hausdorff]], [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]] and $R = C^0(X,\mathbb{R})$ the ring of $\mathbb{R}$-valued continuous functions on $X$.
The **maximal spectrum** of $R$, denoted by $\text{MSpec } R$, is the set of maximal ideals of $R$.

# Geometric interpretation
There is a bijection $X \simeq \text{MSpec } R$ using the following steps.

Given $x \in X$, let $I_x$ be the subset of $R$ consisting of all functions which vanish at $x \in X$. 

*Claim:* $I_x$ is a maximal ideal of $R$ and hence construct a map $X \rightarrow \text{MSpec }R$, $x \mapsto I_x$.

*Proof:*

We know that $I_x$ is maximal if and only if $C^0(X, \mathbb{R})$ is a field. 

For $x \in X$, consider the ring homomorphism 
$$
\begin{align*}
ev_x:C^0(X,\mathbb{R}) &\longrightarrow \mathbb{R} \\ 
f &\longmapsto f(x) 
\end{align*}
$$

We can note that $I_x = \ker (ev_x)$, therefore $C^0/I_x \cong \mathbb{R}$ which is a field so $I_x$ is a maximal ideal. 


Thus we have a map 
$$
\begin{align*}
X &\longrightarrow \text{MSpec }\\
x &\longmapsto I_x
\end{align*}
$$


*Claim:* Every maximal ideal of $R$ is of the form $I_x$ for some $x$. 
(This step uses compactness of $X$.) Moreover, $x$ is unique.
(This step uses that $X$ is Hausdorff.)

> [!NOTE]- Topology on $\text{MSpec }R$
> 
>There is a natural topology on $\text{MSpec }R$, which I do not define here, for which the bijection $X \simeq \text{MSpec }R$ becomes a homeomorphism.
>This is the starting of _non-commutative geometry_, whereby topological spaces are studied via their rings of functions.
>This is also the key perspective of algebraic geometry, whereby algebraic varieties are built by gluing together spectra of certain commutative rings.

*Proof:*

First, I will prove that every maximal ideal of $R$ is of the form $I_x$. 

Let $J$ be a maximal ideal. 
Note if for some $x \in X$, $f(x) = 0, \ \forall f \in J$ then $J \subset I_x$ which is maximal so $J = I_x$ and there is nothing to do. 

Therefore, assume that there the vanishing locus of $J$ is empty. 
For each $x \in X$ there exists a function $f_x$ such that $f_x(x) \neq 0$. 

Since each function is continuous, there is a neighborhood $U_x$ of $x$ such that $f$ is non-zero on this neighborhood. 
Collecting all these $U_x$ gives an open cover of $X$, so by compactness there is some finite sub-cover $U_{x_1}, \dots U_{x_n}$. 
So we now can take each of the functions $f_{x_i}$ and build the new function 
$$
g =  f_{x_1}^2 + \dots +f_{x_n}^2 \in J
$$

This function is always non-zero so we can look at the continuous function 
$$
\frac{1}{f_{x_1}^2 + \dots + f_{x_n}^2}
$$
multiplying this by $g$ above gives $1_R \in J$ so $J = R$ which is a contradiction. 
Therefore, there is some element $x \in X$ such that $f(x) = 0$ for all $f \in J$, so by the above $J = I_x$. 

Next, I will show the uniqueness of $x$. 
Consider a maximal ideal $I_x$.
It suffices to show that $\exists f \in I_x$ such that $f(y) \neq 0$ for each $y \neq x$. 

By Urysohn's lemma, since $X$ is Hausdorff for $x \neq y$ there exists some function $g \in C^0(X, \mathbb{R})$ such that $g(x) \neq g(y)$. 
Then take the function 
$h = g - C_{g(x)}$ where $C_{g(x)}$ is the constant function with value $g(x)$.

Thus, 
$$
h(x) = g(x) - g(x) = 0 \quad \text{and} \quad h(y) = g(y) - g(x) \neq 0
$$

Therefore, for each $y \neq x$ we can construct $h \in I_x$, such that $h \notin I_y$. 
Hence, each maximal ideal is of the form $I_x$ for a unique $x$. 

